Dickens was not the first author to celebrate the Christmas season in
literature, but it was he who superimposed his secular vision of the
holiday upon the public.[1] The forces that impelled Dickens to create
a powerful, impressive, and enduring tale were the profoundly
humiliating experiences of his childhood, the plight of the poor and
their children during the boom decades of the 1830s and 1840s,
Washington Irving's essays on Christmas published in his Sketch Book
(1820) describing the traditional old English Christmas,[11] fairy
tales and nursery stories, as well as satirical essays and religious
tracts.[1][2][3]
While Dickens' humiliating childhood experiences are not directly
described in A Christmas Carol, his conflicting feelings for his
father as a result of those experiences are principally responsible
for the dual personality of the tale's protagonist, Ebenezer
Scrooge. In 1824, Dickens' father was imprisoned in the Marshalsea and
twelve-year-old Charles was forced to take lodgings nearby, pawn his
collection of books, leave school, and accept employment in a blacking
factory. The boy had a deep sense of class and intellectual
superiority and was entirely uncomfortable in the presence of factory
workers who referred to him as "the young gentleman". He developed
nervous fits. When his father was released at the end of a three-month
stint, young Dickens was forced to continue working in the factory,
which only grieved and humiliated him further. He despaired of ever
recovering his former happy life. The devastating impact of the period
wounded him psychologically, coloured his work, and haunted his entire
life with disturbing memories. Dickens both loved and demonised his
father, and it was this psychological conflict that was responsible
for the two radically different Scrooges in the tale – one Scrooge, a
cold, stingy, and greedy semi-recluse, and the other Scrooge, a
benevolent, sociable man whose generosity and goodwill toward all men
earn for him a near-saintly reputation.[12] It was during this
terrible period in Dickens' childhood that he observed the lives of
the men, women, and children in the most impoverished areas of London
and witnessed the social injustices they suffered.[1][13] Charles
Dickens in 1842
Dickens was keenly touched by the lot of poor children in the middle
decades of the 19th century. In early 1843, he toured the Cornish tin
mines where he saw children working in appalling conditions. The
suffering he witnessed there was reinforced by a visit to the Field
Lane Ragged School, one of several London schools set up for the
education of the capital's half-starved, illiterate street
children.[14] Inspired by the February 1843 parliamentary report
exposing the effects of the Industrial Revolution upon poor children
called Second Report of the Children's Employment Commission, Dickens
planned in May 1843 to publish an inexpensive political pamphlet
tentatively titled, "An Appeal to the People of England, on behalf of
the Poor Man's Child" but changed his mind, deferring the pamphlet's
production until the end of the year.[15] He wrote to Dr. Southwood
Smith, one of eighty-four commissioners responsible for the Second
Report, about his change in plans: "[Y]ou will certainly feel that a
Sledge hammer has come down with twenty times the force – twenty
thousand times the force – I could exert by following out my first
idea." The pamphlet would become A Christmas Carol.[16]
In a fund-raising speech on 5 October 1843 at the Manchester Athenæum
(a charitable institution serving the poor), Dickens urged workers and
employers to join together to combat ignorance with educational
reform,[17][18] and realized in the days following that the most
effective way to reach the broadest segment of the population with his
social concerns about poverty and injustice was to write a deeply-felt
Christmas narrative rather than polemical pamphlets and
essays.[17][19] It was during his three days in Manchester, he
conceived the plot of Carol.[17][20]
Washington Irving's The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, written over
twenty years previously and depicting the harmonious warm-hearted
English Christmas festivities of earlier times that he had experienced
while staying at Aston Hall, attracted Dickens,[1] and the two authors
shared the belief that the staging of a nostalgic English Christmas
might restore a social harmony and well-being lost in the modern
world.[21] In "A Christmas Dinner" from Sketches by Boz (1833),
Dickens had approached the holiday in a manner similar to Irving, and,
in The Pickwick Papers (1837), he offered an idealized vision of an
18th century Christmas at Dingley Dell.[21] In the Pickwick episode, a
Mr. Wardle relates the tale of Gabriel Grub, a lonely and
mean-spirited sexton, who undergoes a Christmas conversion after being
visited by goblins who show him the past and future – the prototype of
A Christmas Carol.[22][23]
Other likely influences were a visit made by Dickens to the Western
Penitentiary in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania from March 20-22, 1842;[24]
the decade-long fascination on both sides of the Atlantic with
spiritualism;[13] fairy tales and nursery stories (which Dickens
regarded as stories of conversion and transformation);[2] contemporary
religious tracts about conversion;[2] and the works of Douglas Jerrold
in general, but especially "The Beauties of the Police" (1843), a
satirical and melodramatic essay about a father and his child forcibly
separated in a workhouse,[24] and another satirical essay by Jerrold
which may have had a direct influence on Dickens' conception of
Scrooge called "How Mr. Chokepear keeps a merry Christmas" (Punch,
1841).[3] Plot "Marley's Ghost" Original illustration from A Christmas
Carol
Dickens divides the book into five chapters, which he labels "staves",
that is, song stanzas or verses, in keeping with the title of the
book. He uses a similar device in his next two Christmas books,
titling the four divisions of The Chimes, "quarters", after the
quarter-hour tolling of clock chimes, and naming the parts of The
Cricket on the Hearth "chirps".
The tale begins on a Christmas Eve in 1843 exactly seven years after
the death of Ebenezer Scrooge's business partner, Jacob
Marley. Scrooge is established within the first stave as "a squeezing,
wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old sinner!" who
has no place in his life for kindness, compassion, charity or
benevolence. He hates Christmas, calling it "humbug", refuses his
nephew Fred's dinner invitation, and rudely turns away two gentlemen
who seek a donation from him to provide a Christmas dinner for the
Poor. His only "Christmas gift" is allowing his overworked, underpaid
clerk Bob Cratchit Christmas Day off with pay - which he does only to
keep with social custom, Scrooge considering it "a poor excuse for
picking a man’s pocket every twenty-fifth of December!".
Returning home that evening, Scrooge is visited by Marley's
ghost. Dickens describes the apparition thus - "Marley's face...had a
dismal light about it, like a bad lobster in a dark cellar." It has a
bandage under its chin, tied at the top of its head; "...how much
greater was his horror, when the phantom taking off the bandage round
its head, as if it were too warm to wear indoors, its lower jaw
dropped down upon its breast!"
Marley warns Scrooge to change his ways lest he undergo the same
miserable afterlife as himself. Scrooge is then visited by three
additional ghosts – each in its turn, and each visit detailed in a
separate stave – who accompany him to various scenes with the hope of
achieving his transformation.
The first of the spirits, the Ghost of Christmas Past, takes Scrooge
to Christmas scenes of his boyhood and youth, which stir the old
miser's gentle and tender side by reminding him of a time when he was
more innocent. They also show what made Scrooge the miser that he is,
and why he dislikes Christmas.
The second spirit, the Ghost of Christmas Present, takes Scrooge to
several differing scenes - a joy-filled market of people buying the
makings of Christmas dinner, the celebration of Christmas in a miner's
cottage, and a lighthouse. A major part of this stave is taken up with
the family feast of Scrooge's impoverished clerk Bob Cratchit,
introducing his youngest son, Tiny Tim, who is seriously ill but
cannot receive treatment due to Scrooge's unwillingness to pay
Cratchit a decent wage.
The third spirit, the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come, harrows Scrooge
with dire visions of the future if he does not learn and act upon what
he has witnessed - including Tiny Tim's death. Scrooge's own neglected
and untended grave is revealed, prompting the miser to aver that he
will change his ways in hopes of changing these "shadows of what may
be."
In the fifth and final stave, Scrooge awakens on Christmas morning
with joy and love in his heart, then spends the day with his nephew's
family after anonymously sending a prize turkey to the Cratchit home
for Christmas dinner. Scrooge has become a different man overnight and
now treats his fellow men with kindness, generosity and compassion,
gaining a reputation as a man who embodies the spirit of
Christmas. The story closes with the narrator confirming the validity,
completeness and permanence of Scrooge's transformation.  Publication
First edition cover
Dickens began to write A Christmas Carol in September 1843,[25] and
completed the book in six weeks with the final pages written in the
beginning of December.[26] As the result of a feud with his publisher
over the meagre earnings on his previous novel, Martin Chuzzlewit,[27]
Dickens declined a lump-sum payment for the tale, chose a percentage
of the profits in hopes of making more money thereby, and published
the work at his own expense.[26] High production costs however brought
him only £230 (equal to £19,128 today) rather than the £1,000 (equal
to £83,164 today) he expected and needed, as his wife was once again
pregnant.[27][28] A year later, the profits were only £744 and Dickens
was deeply disappointed. [27]
Production of the book was not without problems. The first printing
contained drab olive endpapers that Dickens felt were unacceptable,
and the publisher Chapman and Hall quickly replaced them with yellow
endpapers, but, once replaced, those clashed with the title page which
was then redone.[15][29] The final product was bound in red cloth with
gilt-edged pages,[25][26] completed only two days before the release
date of 19 December 1843.[30][31] Following publication, Dickens
arranged for the manuscript to be bound in red Morocco leather and
presented as a gift to his solicitor, Thomas Mitton. In 1875, Mitton
sold the manuscript to bookseller Francis Harvey reportedly for £50
(equal to £3,493 today), who sold it to autograph collector, Henry
George Churchill, in 1882, who, in turn, sold the manuscript to
Bennett, a Birmingham bookseller. Bennett sold it for £200 to Robson
and Kerslake of London which sold it to Dickens collector, Stuart
M. Samuel for £300. Finally, it was purchased by J. Pierpont Morgan
for an undisclosed sum. It is now held by the Pierpont Morgan Library,
New York (Douglas-Fairhurst xxx) (Hearn cv,cvi). Four expensive,
hand-coloured etchings and four black and white wood engravings by
John Leech accompanied the text.[26]
Priced at five shillings (equal to £20.79 today), [26] the first run
of 6,000 copies sold out by Christmas Eve and the book continued to
sell well into the New Year.[15][32] By May 1844, a seventh edition
had sold out. In all, twenty-four editions ran in its original
form.[33] In spite of the disappointing profits for the author, the
book was a huge artistic success with most critics responding
positively.[32] Critical reception
The book received immediate critical acclaim. The London literary
magazine the Athenaeum declared it, "A tale to make the reader laugh
and cry – to open his hands, and open his heart to charity even toward
the uncharitable ... a dainty dish to set before a King."[34] Poet and
editor Thomas Hood wrote, "If Christmas, with its ancient and
hospitable customs, its social and charitable observances, were ever
in danger of decay, this is the book that would give them a new
lease. The very name of the author predisposes one to the kindlier
feelings; and a peep at the Frontispiece sets the animal spirits
capering".[34]
William Makepeace Thackeray in Fraser's Magazine (February 1844)
pronounced the book, "a national benefit and to every man or woman who
reads it, a personal kindness. The last two people I heard speak of it
were women; neither knew the other, or the author, and both said, by
way of criticism, 'God bless him!'" Thackeray wrote about Tiny Tim,
"There is not a reader in England but that little creature will be a
bond of union between the author and him; and he will say of Charles
Dickens, as the woman just now, 'GOD BLESS HIM!' What a feeling this
is for a writer to inspire, and what a reward to reap!".[34]
Even the caustic critic Theodore Martin (who was usually virulently
hostile to Dickens), spoke well of the book, noting it was "finely
felt, and calculated to work much social good".[35] A few critics
registered their complaints. The New Monthly Magazine, for example,
thought the book's physical magnificence kept it from being available
to the poor and recommended the tale be printed on cheap paper and
priced accordingly. The religious press generally ignored the tale
but, in January 1884, Christian Remembrancer thought the tale's old
and hackneyed subject was treated in an original way and praised the
author's sense of humour and pathos.[36] Dickens later noted that he
received "by every post, all manner of strangers writing all manner of
letters about their homes and hearths, and how the Carol is read aloud
there, and kept on a very little shelf by itself".[37] After Dickens'
death, Margaret Oliphant deplored the turkey and plum pudding aspects
of the book but admitted that in the days of its first publication it
was regarded as "a new gospel" and noted that the book was unique in
that it actually made people behave better.[35]
Americans were less enthusiastic at first. Dickens had wounded their
national pride with American Notes for General Circulation and Martin
Chuzzlewit, but Carol was too compelling to be dismissed, and, by the
end of the American Civil War, copies of the book were in wide
circulation.[38] The New York Times published an enthusiastic review
in 1863 noting that the author brought the "old Christmas … of bygone
centuries and remote manor houses, into the living rooms of the poor
of today" while the North American Review believed Dickens’s "fellow
feeling with the race is his genius"; and John Greenleaf Whittier
thought the book charming, "inwardly and outwardly".[39]
For Americans, Scrooge’s redemption may have recalled that of the
United States as it recovered from war,[40] and the curmudgeon’s
charitable generosity to the poor in the final pages a reflection of a
similar generosity practised by Americans as they sought solutions to
poverty.[41] The book's issues are detectable from a slightly
different perspective in Frank Capra's It's a Wonderful Life (1946)
and Scrooge is likely an influence upon Dr. Seuss's How the Grinch
Stole Christmas! (1957).[42] Impact The Ghost of Christmas Present
Parley's Illuminated Library pirated the tale in January 1844,[22]
and, though Dickens sued and won his case, the literary pirates simply
declared bankruptcy. Dickens was left to pay £700 in costs, equal to
£56,364 today.[22][43] The entanglements of the various suits Dickens
brought against the publishers, his resulting financial losses, and
the slim profits from the sale of Carol, greatly disappointed
Dickens. He felt a very special affection for the book's moral lesson
and its message of love and generosity. In his tale of a man who is
given a second chance to live a good life, he was demonstrating to his
readers that they, too, could achieve a similar salvation in a selfish
world that had blunted their generosity and compassion.[22]
The novella was adapted for the stage almost immediately. Three
productions opened on 5 February 1844 with one by Edward Stirling
sanctioned by Dickens and running for more than forty nights.[44] By
the close of February 1844, eight rival Carol theatrical productions
were playing in London.[32] Stirling's version played New York City's
Park Theatre during the Christmas season of 1844 and was revived in
London the same year.[45] Hundreds of newsboys gathered for a musical
version of the tale at the Chatham Theatre in New York City in 1844,
but brawling broke out which was only quelled when offenders were led
off by police to The Tombs. Even after order had been restored in the
theatre, the clamorous cries of one youngster drowned out the bass
drum that ushered Marley onto the stage as he rose through a trap
door.[46] Other media adaptations include film, a radio play, and a
television version. In all there are at least 28 film versions of the
tale. The earliest surviving one is Scrooge; or Marley's Ghost (1901),
a silent British version.[47] Six more silent versions followed with
one made by Thomas Edison in 1910. The first sound version was made in
Britain in 1928. Albert Finney won a Golden Globe as Scrooge in a
musical film in 1970 but critical consensus deems the 1951 version
starring Alastair Sim the very best adaptation on film (Kelly
28). Other media adaptations include a popular radio play version in
1934 starring Lionel Barrymore, an American television version from
the 1940s, and, in 1949, the first commercial sound recording with
Ronald Colman (Standiford 171–3).
In the years following the book's publication, responses to the tale
were published by W. M. Swepstone (Christmas Shadows, 1850), Horatio
Alger (Job Warner's Christmas, 1863), Louisa May Alcott (A Christmas
Dream, and How It Came True, 1882), and others who followed Scrooge's
life as a reformed man – or some who thought Dickens had gotten it
wrong and needed to be corrected.[48]
Dickens himself returned to the tale time and again during his life to
tweak the phrasing and punctuation,[48] and capitalized on the success
of the book by annually publishing other Christmas stories in 1844,
1845, 1846, and 1848.[49] The Chimes, The Cricket on the Hearth, The
Battle of Life, and The Haunted Man and the Ghost's Bargain were all
based on the pattern laid down in Carol – a secular conversion tale
laced with social injustice.[49] While the public eagerly bought the
later books, the critics bludgeoned them.[49] Dickens himself
questioned The Battle of Life's worth.[50] Dickens liked its title,
though, and once considered using it for another novel which instead
became A Tale of Two Cities (Douglas-Fairhurst xxvi).
By 1849, Dickens was engaged with David Copperfield and had neither
the time nor the inclination to produce another Christmas book.[51]
Disappointed with those that followed Carol, he decided the best way
to reach his audience with his "Carol philosophy" was via public
readings.[52] In 1853, Carol was the text chosen for his first public
reading with the performance an immense success.[16] Thereafter, he
read the tale in an abbreviated version 127 times,[52] until 1870 (the
year of his death) when it provided the material for his farewell
performance.[16][52] Themes
Dickens wrote in the wake of British government changes to the welfare
system known as the Poor Laws, changes that required among other
things, welfare applicants to work on treadmills. Dickens asks, in
effect, for people to recognise the plight of those whom the
Industrial Revolution has displaced and driven into poverty, and the
obligation of society to provide for them humanely. Failure to do so,
the writer implies through the personification of Ignorance and Want
as ghastly children, will result in an unnamed "Doom" for those who,
like Scrooge, believe their wealth and status qualifies them to sit in
judgement of the poor rather than to assist them.[53]
Some critics like Restad have suggested that Scrooge's redemption
underscores what they see as the conservative, individualistic, and
patriarchal aspects of Dickens's 'Carol philosophy', which propounded
the idea of a more fortunate individual willingly looking after a less
fortunate one. Personal moral conscience and individual action led in
effect to a form of 'noblesse oblige' which was expected of those
individuals of means.[41] Legacy
While the 'Merry Christmas' was popularized following the appearance
of the story,[54] and the name "Scrooge" and exclamation "Bah!
Humbug!" have entered the English language,[55] Ruth Glancy argues the
book's singular achievement is the powerful influence it has exerted
upon its readers. In the spring of 1844, The Gentleman's Magazine
attributed a sudden burst of charitable giving in Britain to Dickens's
novella; in 1874, Robert Louis Stevenson waxed enthusiastic after
reading Dickens's Christmas books and vowed to give generously; and
Thomas Carlyle expressed a generous hospitality by staging two
Christmas dinners after reading the book.[56] In America, a
Mr. Fairbanks attended a reading on Christmas Eve in Boston,
Massachusetts in 1867, and was so moved he closed his factory on
Christmas Day and sent every employee a turkey.[32] In the early years
of the 20th century, the Queen of Norway sent gifts to London's
crippled children signed "With Tiny Tim's Love"; Sir Squire Bancroft
raised £20,000 for the poor by reading the tale aloud publicly; and
Captain Corbett-Smith read the tale to the troops in the trenches of
World War I.[57]
According to historian Ronald Hutton, the current state of observance
of Christmas is largely the result of a mid-Victorian revival of the
holiday spearheaded by A Christmas Carol. Hutton argues that Dickens
sought to construct Christmas as a self-centred festival of
generosity, in contrast to the community-based and church-centred
observations, the observance of which had dwindled during the late
18th and early 19th centuries.[58] In superimposing his secular vision
of the holiday, Dickens influenced many aspects of Christmas that are
celebrated today in Western culture, such as family gatherings,
seasonal food and drink, dancing, games, and a festive generosity of
spirit.[59]
This simple morality tale with its pathos and theme of redemption
significantly redefined the "spirit" and importance of Christmas,
since, as Margaret Oliphant recalled, it "moved us all those days ago
as if it had been a new gospel."[60] and resurrected a form of
seasonal merriment that had been suppressed by the Puritan quelling of
Yuletide pageantry in 17th-century England.[61] Adaptations WPA
poster, 1936–1941 Main article: List of A Christmas Carol adaptations
The story has been adapted to other media including film, opera,
ballet, a Broadway musical (1979's Comin' Uptown, which featured an
all African-American cast), a BBC mime production starring Marcel
Marceau, and Benjamin Britten's 1947 chamber orchestra composition Men
of Goodwill: Variations on 'A Christmas Carol.
